Once around, Gamma
Andromedy. So, Gamma Andromedy is the
third brightest star in the
constellation of Andromeda. And you'll
forgive me if I accidentally call it
Gamma Andromeda because it's so much
easier to say than getting the correct
uh pronunciation with the AE on the end.
Now, Andromeda is an interesting little
constellation. It uh consists mostly of
a line of stars from alpha through
delta, beta and then to gamma indicated
by the red arrow there and of course the
Andromeda galaxy M31. Um but uh those
are the ones you really get to see and
turns out that Alpha is a member also of
the constellation of Pegasus. It seems
to be shared between and that doesn't
happen very often. And it's a bit of a
mistake in constructing the
constellations. But never mind, we're
not talking about Alpha on this
occasion. We're talking about Gamma up
at the other end of the constellation,
the slightly more distant from the main
three. So this has a name and it's
called Almach. And this comes from the
Arabic for the desert links. There's a
lovely picture of a desert links here.
So that's where the name Al-Mac comes
from. I shall probably continue to call
it gamma
Andromeda. Hypacos satellite showed that
it's uh 390 light years from us. So it's
not quite one of the sun's near
neighbors. It's in the next rank really
that go out to a a few hundred lighty
years and it's slowly approaching the
sun. It's only 12 km/s. That's rather
slow actually uh compared with things
like the speed with which the uh earth
goes around the sun even. So not really
going to approach us very closely
anytime soon. But the reason I picked
this one is because we often observe it
with our telescopes at the public
observing nights here in Cambridge
because it's lovely. It's a colorful
double. There aren't very many truly
colorful doubles. There's Alberio and
probably the second best is this one,
Gamma Andromeda. And this is a
photograph that I took with a small
10-in reflector. Um, and I've taken it
very slightly out of focus because that
helps to exacerbate the colors. The
telescope shows one golden yellow star
and one bluish white star and they look
superb. um first observed by Mayor back
in
1778 and easily separated 10
arcsec that corresponds to a very wide
orbit taking uh nearly 5,000 years 4 7
years. Now in terms of the designations
we can either call these A or and B or
gamma 1 and gamma 2 referring to the
gamma
andromeda. So if we have a look at the
first one, gamma 1 or a, this is orange
Kclass,
4,228 Kelvin, but it's quite a massive
star. It's 8.7 times the mass of the sun
and nearly 100 times the radius. So this
is a large giant and it has swollen well
up to a very large size
indeed. As such, the power output
2,987, nearly 3,000 times the total
energy output of our sun. So, uh, a
classic giant star. In fact, classed as
a bright giant. So, it gets the
designation to II after the K. And that
puts it on the Herzbrung Russell diagram
where it says bright giants with the
label two at the right hand side there.
So a row above the ordinary giant stars
but not as far up as the super giants or
hyper giants up in that general giant
part of the spectrum.
Now these bright giants and in
particular gamma Andromeda are classed
as AGB stars, asmtotic giant branch
stars. You can see in the Herzbrung
Russell diagram again on the lower left
there you have the main sequence running
down the diagonal and the path of a star
like the sun which will exhaust its core
helium eventually. Sorry, it's core
hydrogen eventually leaving an inert
ball of helium in the center. And as it
does so, it will move up and right
becoming a subgiant and then gradually
all the way up to being a red giant at
the peak of the red giant branch. And
then if it's massive enough,
the helium core will ignite in a helium
flash and that will drive the
temperature of the star higher taking it
down towards the
um left hand side of the diagram on
what's called a blue loop heading over
through yellow and possibly into the
blue as it uh starts to consume both the
hydrogen in shell and the helium in the
core. And because it's now using all of
its mass to generate energy, it's a more
efficient star and therefore um over
towards the left hand side, the hotter
side of the diagram. But as it dumps
consumed product, helium turning into
carbon and oxygen inside the core, then
the star loses efficiency again. It ends
up with an inert carbon oxygen core and
so it moves back up to the right hand
side again and slightly hotter and
slightly more luminous but uh
nevertheless becoming a red AGB star on
that second phase in the red giant
burning. And a star of this sort of mass
will
um then run out of ability to continue
and uh form a planetary nebula and then
leave a white dwarf behind eventually.
Um now the first phase lasts a few
million years, a few billion years in
the case of gamma Andromeda, but later
on the blue loop is pretty rapid just a
100,000 years. So we don't catch stars
in that stage very often. Um and the AGB
phase won't last long
either. and a post AGB star after it has
formed this inner
uh carbon oxygen core that lasts an even
less period of time just 10,000 years as
the outer layers are expelled by the
high radiation pressure pushing the
outer layers away getting rid of them
and exposing the deeper hotter interior.
So the surface temperature increases
again as it moves over towards the left
hand side, the hotter side of the
diagram. Um, and the planetary nebula is
expelled. Um, and as it does that, it
just leaves the much less massive core
behind. So the size goes down, the whole
thing shrinks away, and a white dwarf is
formed. So
the sea star
Th this was discovered by William Stru
and he what he realized was
that the second star gamma 2 or B as we
were calling it is in fact two stars B
and C in an elliptical orbit that just
takes 64 years around them. Um so it
goes from 13 to 52 astronomical units
and in 2019 they were just uh 0.16
arcsec apart. Very close indeed. But we
have this fantastic image by Damian
Peach here showing the A star, the KT
type star, that post AGB star on the the
lower left. And at the higher right we
have the pair B and C separated and
orbiting around each other. That's an
incredible image for such a closely uh
located pair of stars.
So gamma Andromeda not actually a double
star. There's a third member and in fact
there's a fourth member. This is what's
called a qu a hierarchical quadruple
system. Spectroscopy revealed that what
we're now calling the B star should
really be called the BA and BB
components.
Both main sequence stars of type B. So
the uh blue white hot stars and they're
orbiting around each other in 2.6 days.
So we've got BA and BB whizzing around
each other in 2.6 days. That pair are in
an orbit with C that takes 64 days. And
then the whole of that triple system is
going around a third larger orbit with A
that takes nearly 5,000 years.
And we've got the the figures in the uh
data here. So uh A the massive KT type
giant 8.7 solar masses, BA 3.3, BB 2.4,
and C 2.6. So all fairly similar uh
slightly hotter than the sun A and B
class stars. And then we have the
the three layers of this hierarchical
orbit. So it's rather unusual to find
that we have this uh arrangement. I
think that's quite incredible. And so
with that, I will leave you with the
fantastic image by Damian Peach and the
hierarchical map. And thanks very much
for listening. That was once around
Gamma Andromeda.